# Golden Grids
How I Learned to Stop Worrying about Rows and Columns and Love the Golden Ratio

[Live Demo](https://gregoryedgerton.github.io/golden-grids/)

| Input | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| first (required) | `integer` | Pick any number in the Fibonacci Sequence excluding `0`. Your `first` doesn’t have to be smaller than `last`, however the library will sort it smallest to largest before when calcuating. |
| last (required) | `integer` | Pick any other number in the Fibonacci Sequence, `1` is the only valid duplicate value. |
| rotation | `integer` | Orientational value of the grid in `90` degree increments [`0`,`90`,`180`,`270`] (defaults to `0`). |
| clockwise | `boolean` | Sets the spiral direction — `true` for clockwise, `false` for counter-clockwise (defaults to `true`). |

## How it works?
Based on your `first` and `last` input values this library will calculate the corresponding slice of the Fibonacci Sequence (`1`, `1`, `2`, `3`, `5`, `8`, `13`, `21`, `34`, `55`, ...), and create a responsive grid based on the golden ratio.  Instead of traditional rows and columns you'll have proportionally aligned boxes that follow the golden ratio. What you do with those boxes is your business, but at least you won't be boring. 

 A `1`, `1` grid would be two equal squares (side by side or stack depending on your `rotation` value), while a `1`,`3` grid is 4 squares where the last 3 squares get progressively larger (`1`, `1`, `2`, `3`). The numbers of the Fibonacci Sequence you select are used as relative ratios of each box.  While the grid system technically works with ANY fibonacci numbers (excluding `0`, *but if anyone wants to challenge me on that i'd be open to it ;)* ), we do have some limits due to the differences in decimal place rounding between browsers and CSS/JS. At large scales those fractional difference introduce gaps into the grid. If you are an abstract artist, may be you’d be into that sort of thing!

Golden Grids are also responsive and will be 100% their container width. The proportions of the grid shouldn’t break, if they do your stuffing the box with too much stuff and not accounting for grid overflow or pushing the limits on your sequence range. I debated how much I want to solve for overflow in this first release but for the time being that’s your blew, not mine. As I use this more myself I might feel differently, TBD,

The real magic  is leveraging `rotation` and `mirror` inputs which determine the direction of the spiral. Using these values you can create landscape and portrait grids. Think of how we declare `padding` or `margin`, we list values top, right, bottom left. Golden Grids uses this same approach to place boxes which create our spiral. By default our first grid item represents top, we then add 1 to the right, 1 to the bottom , 1 to the left, and repeat. With the `rotation` input you can shift that start point 1 over and reverse the flow with `mirror`.

The possibilities are endless… kinda

## How big can I go?
I've tested it up to the [100th sequenced number](https://www.math.net/list-of-fibonacci-numbers), `354224848179261915075` (that’s a big number). In english that is three hundred fifty-four quintillion, two hundred twenty-four quadrillion, eight hundred forty-eight trillion, one hundred seventy-nine billion, two hundred sixty-one million, nine hundred fifteen thousand, and seventy-five according to this [number to word converter](https://www.calculatorsoup.com/calculators/conversions/numberstowords.php))). It doesn't really work lol. The function which generates the Fibonacci Sequence doesn't compute a number that large and I know this because the validator  throws an the error msg returning the input with two extra trailing zeros which isn’t a Fibonacci number (*maybe someone else with a comp sci degree wants to figure that one out!*).

Technically the 97th number, `83621143489848422977`, is the last valid value that doesn't throw an error. That said it still doesn't really work, the math that generates the spiral breaks down. The DOM count is right but the positioning is off, CSS Grid (spoiler alert) doesn't seem to want to go that high. Beneath the hood the highest number declared is the grid row count. Based on my testing the 34th number, `5702887`, aka a modest five million, seven hundred, two thousand, eight hundred, and eighty-seven is the largest value that I could use to produce a clean grid.

To be honest it's less about the number, and more about controlling the range of numbers we select. After all, a similar range at the start and end of the sequence would render comparable, `8/16` is still `1/2`… same concept. Shorter ranges are easier on the eyes and more practical to use. I say this after years of manually hiding gold ratios in my work. You can still use `5702887`, but pair it with the 32nd number `2178309` to create a lovely 4 box golden grid.

 Now you might be asking yourself, "isn't that a 3 box golden grid Grego? 32nd, 33rd, 34th". I'm glad you asked friend, because i'd like to highlight a feature that took a minute to work through. Golden Grids allow you to skip numbers in the sequence and they can add just the [right amount of flair](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F7SNEdjftno) to your grid. That's because the preceding space is still accounted for in our grid. Not as a perfect 1:1 square, but as a rectangular box which adds 1 to the total count. This preceding box will proportionally represent all the sequenced boxes that would have been place ahead of the value you defined.

## Why did you make this?
We like to think we are mobile first, but we still speak desktop first and cannot let go of traditional print formats on the web. Just like the floppy icon that's now become synonymous with a save action to a whole generation that has no idea what a floppy is. I worry that we’ve become too comfortable with rows and columns. Whether its an engineering department at a fortune 100 crafting a component library, an agency’s senior developer on the cutting edge, or a newb straight from a bootcamp, I've seen the same patterns play out. The only difference is if they can do it without negative margins ;) 

This library is meant to challenge that notion with a radical change. Fuck your couch, your rows, and your columns, Golden Grids isn't for everything. I'm just tired of seeing homogenized design across the web and sometimes the first step is a new tool. Primary company objectives in a 3-up row on desktop, 2-up w/ 1 orphan on tablet, and stacked on mobile. I do not think thats the fixed-width mind-set that motivated Ethan Marcotte when he coined the term "responsive web design" in his [May 2010 article](https://alistapart.com/article/responsive-web-design/) in *A List Apart*. Also shout out the OG who formed it [Jeffrey Zeldman](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jeffrey_Zeldman), every UX/UI designer and frontend engineer should know his name, he paved the way for so much. 

In all seriousness, while we still have practical use for traditional `<tr>`, `<th>`, `<td>` tables, we obviously can't get away from `<div>` row and columns either. In most use-cases that’s all you need. I’ll never forget what [Craig Phares](https://x.com/craigphares) said to me when we were neighbors at [Cowerks](https://www.cowerks.com/) in Asbury Park. I asked him if he ever used the custom grid config tool on bootstrap and he responded …. “Do you really need that full 16 column grid, or do you just need two divs at 50%”. He was right, I didn’t and as I type this, Craig my hatred of the rows/columns might have been born that day.

 All we can do is continue to push our craft and challenge the status quo when inspiration finds us. For me I'm passionate about the intersection of design and engineering. It's what motivated me to translate the first-ever scientifically accurate painting of a solar eclipse from 1918 by Russell Howard Butler, into a responsive HTML/CSS animated solar eclipse for [Princeton University Art Museum](https://artmuseum.princeton.edu/)'s centennial celebration, [Transient Effects](https://artmuseum.princeton.edu/transient-effects). Using a `<ul>`/`<li>` each ray of light that beamed past the corona was painstakingly traced back to the original source painting and proportionally sized based on the diameter of the sun. The result is something that to the naked eye isn't that impressive (a blog for another day). But if you made it this far you are maybe like me, inspect that bad boy. You'll see 127 `<li>`'s rotated from the center point, there length and thickness relative to the parent "sun" aka a `<div>` that resizes without issue and independent of device or browser window. No fancy javascript calculating math, just a little event listener to pause and stop play ;). I even went the extra mile to even split the padding value I use for the top and bottom to keep the proportional groth of the line thickness relative to the original illustrator vector. It's a level of detail that was self-imposed.

I hope people have fun using this, I had fun make it. I'll upload more examples of what you can do with it, blogs about my paired sessions with ChatGPT as some of the more complex math I could only prompt/verify but not write. 

## A long standing obsession with the Golden Ratio
The golden ratio has been a passion of mine since Philly. I remeber the painting that did it. The 1931 commerical piece, [l’Atlantique](https://www.singulart.com/en/blog/2024/11/18/latlantique-by-a-m-cassandre-bc/?srsltid=AfmBOoqgNP_Zmgl_aaC6JxqdfLVkmmWCcF1w75P1f2wtDuxrSU0EBot1) by A.M. Cassandre hangs on my wall at home in all its laged lithograph glory. I first saw it in the pages of [The History of Graphic Design (3rd Edition)](https://www.amazon.com/History-Graphic-Design-Philip-Meggs/dp/0471291986) while at college. Hidden in the smoke stack, trailing off towards the tugboat boat in the lower frame is the golden ratio. It spoke to me, I imagined my mother as a teen headings back to France for the summers to help her aunts deliver bread. Cassandre's work perfectly blended the influences of my life.

Years later when we had the record label I used to make these 1-off landing pages for album releases. I always tried to sneak the golden ratio in just as he had, placing the album art ad the dominate square and using the side for navigation. It was close but still it wasn't a true represntation. My first attempted at a true layout based soley on the golden ration was in May of 2016 with flexbox. I calculated all the realtive math to convert `100vw` into awhat I know would call call a `1`,`8` golden grid. It was cool but it didnt do much, nor had I considered reducing the count. At that time I thought it had to be a means of traversing time (I still things thats cool). I tried to used jQuery to do an infinite inward spiral but I didn't have the Javascript chops to make it happen. From there the idea kinda of just sat. From 2016-2020 I would go through a pretty brutual start-up divorce, and in 2021 I started working for Northwestern Mutual as a Software Engineer. The nine years that sat between my priorities changed, I had a family, you know the deal, its a tale as old as time.

 It wasn't till September 2024 when I saw [Mads Stoumann](https://stoumann.dk/)'s dev.to post breaking down his [Golden Ratio with CSS Grid ](https://dev.to/madsstoumann/the-golden-ratio-in-css-53d0) that I rekindled my curiosity. I had already been using CSS Grid for [gregoryedgerton.com](https://gregoryedgerton.com/) in a similar manner pondering how my golden ratio aspirations could fit in but I had clung too hard to a `:nth-child` approach from my 2016 experiments. So I started experimenting, first with a static grid, that was relaticely easy. Once I got my prototpye under control I also got chatGPT involved to helping with the more complex math and in the intial 6hr paired session. From there the project blossomed.
